The goal of this analysis was to explore temporal and categorical patterns in U.S. birth data from 2000 to 2014. Using tools from tidyverse and dplyr libraries and layered ggplot2 visualizations, I aimed to uncover interesting insights about the timing and frequency of births in this datset. 

I originally planned to look at basic bar charts to get a visual on my categorical data like months and days of the week. Then, I decided to look at stacked bar charts to get a better idea of proportions of births on days of the week in any given month. The plot by the day of the week reveals whether certain days (like weekends) have more or fewer births. There's a significant dip on weekends, which could have to do with scheduled deliveries that may be less common on weekends due to staff availability and resource allocation. The plot by the month reveals a dip in births in early spring and an increase in births in late summer and early fall. This could tell the story of holiday conceptions or societal preferences for pregnancy timelines. These charts have a logical calendar order of weekdays or months in the axes, not ordered alphabetically or by births. The variables are colored as unordered categories because the color is only meant for distinction and not for emphasis on order. The legend and x axis were removed because of redundancy, and I used a minimalist theme to reduce clutter. For the stacked bar chart, I was looking at the proportions of days of the week for each month. I colored my chart accordingly with the legend lining up with the visualization with minimal labeling due to the inherent understanding of the variables. I did not include any axis labels or legend labels as these were all intuitive. This plot showed there wasn't a whole lot of variation in the data proportionally. The same overall day of the week trends applied across all months. 

Because I'm looking for temporal patterns, I planned to have a time series chart as well. I used a simple scatterplot of daily births against time as well as a smoothed time scatterplot of daily births faceted by year. These plots reveal seasonal birth trends, consistent dips around holidays, and an uptick in late summer/early fall birth totals. I used the locally estimated scatterplot smoothing technique with a small span to capture more variations in nonlinear trends. Neither of these plots required axes or lengends due to their easily understood time based variables and simple title. The use of time on the x-axis supports natural interpretation, and the contrast of line color highlights the line trend on top of the grey-scale data points. 

Additionally, I wanted to incorporate some kind of visual that was similar to a correlogram, so I did a dot matrix - combining the ideas of a color coded heatmap and a size encoded bubble chart. The chart uses both color intensity and bubble size to encode the same variable (total births), reinforcing the magnitude of each value and making the chart more easily interpretable. The categorical variables used were month and days of the week. This chart easily combines the insights from the previous multiple charts. You can see the least popular month and day combination being Sundays in February and the most favorable combinations being Tuesdays-Thursdays in July-September. By the horizontal patterns, you can see Saturdays and Sundays have considerably less than the weekdays with Mondays following behind them. By the vertical patterns, you can see the seasonal patterns in births with higher births in July to September. This chart shows how the time based variables interact and give you the information from multiple charts condensed in one. I used a gradient scale to convey the inherent order in the birth totals, and I made sure the two legends were aligned properly. The grid layout supports pattern recognition across both variables while the intuitive axes and clear legend ensure easy interpretability. 

A consistent minimal theme is used to remove unnecessary visual clutter and draw focus to the data. I used the same color pallete for the unordered categorical variable charts and the same customized pink pallete for the other charts to stay consistent. Axes labels were avoided when the meaning was intuitive and the legends are placed appropriately throughout the file. 
